I put hundreds of hours of taping this.
Ricky J. You became a collector, really, as one device, one way of helping you craft, I guess.
That's what I said yesterday, yeah.
It's absolutely true that my inspiration was going to
going to old books, initially looking for material.
I mean, I've always had this thing about wanting to do performance that was different from what other people were doing in my field.
And other than inventing material, which I do, and which is great fun, the other way to deal with that is to be doing things that are so old people have forgotten.
So I started looking at books for that reason.
And about when would you say
I'm very bad.
I mean, one thing I can tell you is that I can remember almost all the events of my life, but I cannot give you any idea of how they appeared chronologically.
I'm just very bad at that.
Well, how about what phase of your... were you still learning the craft, the young man?
I'm still learning the craft now.
It's, you know, it's limitless, the pursuit of sleight of hand, so I'll be learning it always.
But, yeah, I suppose I first started reading histories when I was...
a teenager or in college, but I wasn't actively collecting at that point.
I mean, I guess I've been seriously collecting.
I mean, see, I'm reluctant to say things like this, because I honestly don't know.
I mean, my guess would be 15 years, but maybe it's 20 years.
So you were like 30, maybe.
Maybe younger.
But that's okay.
I'm younger, yeah.
Well, just so we could have a framework, but would you say you got the, was there a point at which
You weren't just acquiring material, but you became obsessed with the... Well, I mean, it's very interesting.
There's a man who was at the talk yesterday, and whose house I'm staying at right now, who was really responsible for me becoming, I think, a serious collector.
He's a fascinating man as well.
Will you tell me who he is?
Yeah, his name is Percy Diaconis, and he's a professor at Harvard, and was a magician for years, and a serious book collector.
And we were kids together in New York.
He's two years old.
Is he somebody I had to touch with you?
That's possible.
I mean, he's a wonderful, wonderful fellow.
I mean, brilliant, interesting.
How did he spell his last name?
It's a Greek.
D-I-A-C-O-N-I-S.
I don't know if he'll talk, but I mean, you're more than welcome in.
I haven't shut down yet on this, I have to say.
Well, except he's kind of reluctant to talk about... I mean, he's a very serious academic, he's a MacArthur fellow.
I mean, he's an amazing guy, and he just sort of shies away from publicity.
Well, anyway, but he... Anyway, he and I, you know... I would name him, by the way, without... Childhood friends.
Yeah, well, it's his permission, not mine, that matters in terms of this.
Seriously, I mean, I respect his worship in that sense.
I mean, we're great friends, obviously.
But, you know, we knew of each other as child magicians in New York.
But he became a serious collector long before I did, when he was a kid.
Collecting in this area?
Yeah, in this subject.
And when we met again, I guess he was in graduate school here at Harvard, and I guess I was at Cornell.
I came here.
I moved here one year.
I mean, and this is the problem.
I'm never going to be able to tell you what year it was.
It was one year when I rented a place in Cambridge or Somerville, somewhere right in this area, for a year, and I only spent five weeks in this apartment that I rented.
I was on the road for 11 months of this year performing.
But in the weeks that I was here, we reacquainted and became friends, again, having had seen each other since kids.
And I had access to his library, and I was intrigued by it.
um in the years that followed i mean he you know he and i spent a lot of time together talking about talking about these books and you know our collections aren't identical uh by any stretch i mean you know i then i branched off quickly into this field of unusual entertainments rather than just mainstream magical um which he doesn't collect but uh he's
He's wonderful.
I mean, he's a great person to talk about.
I mean, the thing that I suppose we have that's different than people I know in this field is that we approach the history of magic and the literature of magic from the sense of the magician and what he did.
It's not just an exercise in what was his book about.
It's trying to understand the performance that's being described as well.
And I think, to some extent, you have to be a solidly good performer to be able to intuit it on that level.
And there are people who write fascinating historical work who don't go into that.
But sometimes there's a sense of loss about that, that maybe they're missing the point.
And this is not to knock everybody who's written histories of magic.
It's just to say that I think it's a wonderful advantage to approach it from the state of being able to perform it.
Actually, one of the theses I'm pursuing in this book is that the collector doesn't just acquire and accumulate and put things on the shelves, but in many cases, the collector is responsible for the colors and nice stories, for preserving things, for saving things which otherwise would be lost and would disappear.
And I wonder if you, in your own way, are not only
putting together an archive of pretty rare and fascinating material, but also by your practice perpetuating it.
I mean... Well, to me, that's the way a library lives.
I mean, my goal as the curator of a collection, beyond my personal interest, is to show that this art form is absolutely alive now.
I mean, that's really essential.
Is it alive through the books?
To be honest, it's alive through performance.
I mean, the books are a tool, and they're important as a road, you know,
to take to get you for performance, but it's not just the books that keep it alive.
I mean, I think that when it's most effective is when you see, you know, the results of that.
Okay, but I understand this, but you're a young man, 43 years old.
You did some fascinating things yesterday, and if I understood what you were saying, these were things that you learned
a number of these things, 16th century, 17th century, 18th century stunts, if that's the correct word, that you picked up out of these sources.
So, in a way, the book did preserve them for you.
I mean, they passed this knowledge on to you.
Is that true?
Yeah.
I mean, it is true, but I also had people to help me interpret them and to see...
You know, I mean, there are cases where I just found an old book, realized there was a wonderful principle, and then began to perform it.
That's true.
And so if that is true, I guess that answers your question.
Now, of course, one of the great strengths of magic is that we don't know what the hell it is you're doing.
We don't know how you're doing it.
You know, it's a sense of wonder, it's a sense of awe.
In these books, however, are these tricks...
passed on?
I mean, do the great job?
Yeah, they're rarely written well enough for you to just be able to understand, and that's why I guess I used the word intuit before.
I think you have to come to it with some knowledge.
If you pick up a magic book, it's pretty much to me like reading an engineering text or a math text, but it's very, very hard to just pick that up and to understand what it is.
And I'd say that there are very few people who I've ever met in my life who are accomplished
and you'll find that my standards are generally higher than most people's i mean i i it takes a lot to impress me in the performance of magic i've seen wonderful things in my life and i i don't often say to people that's good when i don't think it's good i mean so to really be accomplished in this field i'm suggesting is a very difficult thing to do and there's almost no one who has been able to do that without some sort of personal tutelage just from books it's
not totally impossible but almost impossible it's almost the same with calligraphy as well which is another field i have some serious interest in well do you need a mentor then you need a i guess that's what i'm saying you do you know the literature is incredibly helpful but you need a mentor sure and do you think that that in the continuum through the centuries that it has it's something that primarily is passed on yeah in spite of the fact that there is this absolutely enormous amount of literature in the field i do believe that that that the real secrets have been passed
you know hand to hand person to person there's more accessible now in this field than there has ever been i mean and the thing is that i think every succeeding generation laments the amount of material which is available in this field really yeah sure i mean you read old literature and you see people complaining about this used to be a great secret and now people know about it well to me things that were known 20 years ago to a half a dozen people
are in some cases purchasable in a general bookstore for under $10.
I mean, some of the great secrets.
Does that upset you?
Yes, it does upset me.
But on the other hand, being able to do that material well and to, you know, gain the understanding and the knowledge necessary to do that well doesn't come from buying that book.
You have to really sit down and be able to... Professional or amateur isn't the key either, which is interesting.
Some of the greatest magic done in the world is done by amateur, flat out.
You know, amateurs have a great advantage on some level, I mean, in the old sense of the word, the Greek sense.
What would the advantage be?
That they're not in any way motivated by money, and so it's a much purer approach.
They don't have to work for an audience of people.
I mean, they can just pursue it as an art model.
I think of a friend of mine named Steve Freeman, who was a financial analyst down in Ventura, who was, you know, just a...
a masterful exponent of sleight of hand who doesn't perform for money, who does it for the love of the art, who's just amazingly accomplished.
And that's wonderful.
There may be some levels on which he envies my ability to be able to go out and do it for a paying audience.
I mean, you always find something attractive on the other side.
So I have a great dislike of people who don't take the art seriously and who butcher the art, but the division isn't simply amateur or professional.
There are professionals who butcher the art constantly.
And there are amateurs who are so good they could easily be professionals, but choose not to be.
Is it possible to see an amateur, I mean a professional, a bad professional, screw up a trick and because he's doing it so poorly, figure out the technique?
Absolutely, and that infuriates me.
I mean, the idea... And that blows it for all the... I think it does.
It blows it to a certain extent that if that secret is made available, no matter how well the next person performs it,
there's going to be a sense of loss and that's the difference between magic and singing if you hear somebody go out and butcher a wonderful song and then you hear another person sing it beautifully it doesn't ruin it for you you know you can you can appreciate that and the same with the playing of an instrument or the same of you know how many times have you gone out and seen shakespeare butchered and then you see a great performance and it's a great performance that is one of the problems with magic that if
If this principle really is exposed by ineptitude, no matter how wonderfully it's performed the next time, it's not quite the same.
Are there things that you see that you don't understand how they're being done?
Occasionally, it's a wonderful feeling.
Can you give me an example?
More often?
Well, I mean, I'm still fooled by people.
It's just, it's great.
Vernon, who is, you know, my mentor, and Percy's as well, I mean, you know, Guy Vernon is a great sleight of hand artist, who's 95 now, I mean... Where does that man live?
He lives in Los Angeles, you know, I mean, he still pulls me.
It's great, and then, you know, just recently I was... Maybe I could call him and get a quote from him about you.
Would you mind?
I wouldn't mind it, again, if he chooses to... You know, at 95, he's a pretty irascible fellow.
I've got a 95-year-old guy interviewed, I'll tell you something about him later, Dave Kirshner, I've never heard of him.
I'll tell you about him later.
But yeah, sure, you can call him and see what he says.
You know, depending on his mood, he might be very anxious to talk about it.
I mean, he just came to my conference.
You know, I just put on this conference on the history of magic in Los Angeles, and he was in the front row every day for three days listening to every lecture.
You know, he's wonderful.
I mean, he's so wonderful.
His name?
Dai, D-A-I, Burnett, D-E-R-N-O-N.
Uh-huh.
And then recently I've seen some wonderful stuff from a young magician named Michael Weber that really puzzled me very badly.
You say very badly.
Yeah, I mean fooled me.
No, not at all, no.
Excited you?
Yeah, absolutely.
It's exciting to be fooled, and it's a great feeling.
Now, is it principle?
See, I'm not in the field, obviously.
I'm a neophyte when it comes to this.
It could.
I mean, there are lots of things that can do one.
It can be a principle that you know that's disguised beautifully.
It can be a new principle.
It can be a combination of principles.
It can be any of those things that do.
But people who really come up who are incredibly creative, like Percy, or Michael Webb, or David Ross, I mean, it's exciting to see things.
Oh, yeah.
It's a wonderful feeling.
You know, they've said in writing, there's nothing new to write about, it's just a variation of the same classic theme.
Can this be said in magic as well?
Yes, I mean, you know, right, there are only so many principles.
But on the other hand, I mean, the reason I love cards so much, I mean, Hobsons are called cards, the poetry of magic, and the possibilities are almost limitless.
I mean, here's Vernon, who's been the major figure in his art for a hundred years.
And he's still learning.
There are 52 objects.
I mean, the possibilities are simply limitless.
And so there are always new principles.
And yes, most of them are based on old principles.
That was, again, part of the thing we were talking about in the lecture yesterday with the impenetrable secret, tracing it back, tracing it forward, coming up with new variations, dealing with it, analyzing it.
That's part of the process that I find so exciting in my field.
Do you have a definition that you work by for magic?
No.
I answered that quickly, huh?
No, I don't.
I mean, I've never said and tried to define it.
I think it would limit it to do that.
But now that you are one in a series, I think, and you don't really have a beginning for it.
I mean, it goes back as far as people... Right.
There's a beginning of the literature and that we discussed, you know.
Yeah, it's hard to know when it was first done.
I mean, some people would call it the oldest, the oldest profession.
Yeah.
What was the question I was working on there?
But the literature, as you pointed out, well, yeah, all right.
There was a point in the Elizabethan times, for instance, when they were compared.
Playwrights, of course, were in the same.
Actors were considered nothing more than vagabonds and ruffians.
Tricksters, right?
I mean, whatever.
You mentioned that yesterday.
And at some point, obviously, they became respectable?
Well, I actually started to talk about saying they didn't become respectable, that they weren't respectable then and they weren't respectable now.
I would say there was a brief period in the middle of the 19th century, largely because of the Salon Hobson's there in Vienna and the Théâtre Robert Houdin in Paris, where magic did become respectable.
I mean, people who went to see Hobson's perform in his Salon,
were the same people who would go to the highest forms of artistic entertainment in all of Vienna.
It was considered on that same level.
And that excites me.
As much as I've always been, you know, a fan of the tawdry sideshow carnival aspect of this, you know, I work sideshow, I love it.
I also think that people have to understand that there exists
incredibly classic side to it as well.
And, you know, it's nice to know that both exist.
It's interesting that associations make that very hard now.
Well, I watched the, you know, that was a pretty good gathering of people yesterday.
I mean, it had them.
I mean, bending over, looking over to see what they were doing.
You know, two feet and saying, how is he doing this thing, you know?
And, yeah, absolutely, it is awesome.
I mean, it's like my little kids watching animation.
What does it do?
It really does inspire wonder.
Maybe you're kind of like a Disney for older people, you know?
The idea is to achieve wonder, I guess.
Well, it's certainly, yeah, largely fun.
I don't know.
The thing about books, of course, is to preserve and to transmit knowledge.
It's not going to be a book of definitions, but obviously what we get from books is a connection with the past.
It is kind of contradictory in a way, isn't it, that you're passing on information that an individual can use to...
Not to deceive people, but to trick them, I guess.
Well, it is deceiving.
I mean, I'm interested in deception.
I mean, I collect.
One of the major areas I collect in is on deception.
You know, I have a large personal collection, one of the largest of material on frauds and confidence games and gambling.
You mean beyond your profession, in other words?
Well, you know, what's the link with my profession?
I mean, again, it's hard to define where one stops and another starts.
It's...
You know, the basis of it is deceiving someone, is fooling someone, and it's one of the reasons it's so peculiar to accept it as an art form, but it's also fascinating.
I mean, again, it's a concept which goes back to antiquity and which is, you know, always interesting to people.
Thomas J. Wise is going to be a medical point.
You must have stuff.
Yeah, sure.
Let's talk a little bit about the collection.
We haven't really talked in terms of numbers and the types of things that you have.
My own collection?
Yeah.
And let's separate the two.
You did mention that the Mulholland are separate.
Right.
I'll be happy to talk about both.
My own collection, I guess, is in three basic areas.
I collect material on magic,
literature of Gondra.
I collect material on unusual entertainers, which is largely the basis of the things that you see in my book.
For instance, I'd say 80 to 90 percent of those illustrations are from my own collection, and that came before I really was associated with the library.
I researched at the library when I was at the Players Club, but when I say the library, I mean Mulholland.
know that field and that's a field that as far as i know i mean they're just i never really knew anybody actively collecting in that field i know a few people who are peripheral and then the third the third large area is gambling and swindling you know material and deception so those are the three major areas i really couldn't tell you how many books i have i don't know i suppose between three and five thousand volumes and then
Oh, hundreds if not thousands of posters and playbills and pieces of ephemera dealing with the same things, whatever original material I can find, manuscripts and letters.
Would you say that you clearly have the bug now?
I mean, it's not just to nourish the profession.
No, I mean, it's gratifying on a level.
you know, beyond that as well.
I mean, and I'm troubled by some of those areas of collecting.
I mean, the need to own something often is troublesome.
Why is that?
I'm not sure exactly why.
I guess maybe I don't like the thought of collecting becoming competitive.
I mean, I've seen too much of people wanting to have something to keep somebody else from having it.
I think collecting can take you into some negative areas if you're not careful.
And, you know, I find even in myself a need to
to temper that kind of thing.
I think every collector has the ability to rationalize why they should have an item that no one else should.
And I find myself doing that all the time.
And it's easy for me because I write about the field and I perform in the field.
So I'm often resentful of somebody getting a book that I want for some real specific need and that they want simply because they don't have it.
and they're never going to open it, and they're never going to do anything with it.
And I think, like I say, that all collectors do that.
You're one of the few people, I would say, who could actually write off every purchase that you buy.
I don't know if you do or you don't.
That's your business.
I mean, it certainly is work-related, yeah.
Although, again, that's not what motivated me to do it.
I mean, to some extent, the writing of Lerner Tiggs rationalized
What was for me at some times, you know, a pretty compulsive endeavor.
I mean, I guess there was no requirement saying that I was dead up to my years buying books for many, many years.
All the years that I was putting this collection together when I wasn't doing particularly well and felt some genuine need to do it, and I wasn't even sure what that was.
I mean, I knew that I was just so incredibly engrossed in this field that I continued to do it, and then suddenly when Learning Picks came out, it all seemed to make sense.
Yeah.
You just glided over something that's fascinating to me, the fact that you were acquiring to the point of depriving food, you know, from... Well, actually, a few booksellers told me that they flat out believed I paid more of a percentage of the money I earned on books than anyone they knew.
I certainly...
I think by nature, someone who has little money is paying more of a percentage than people who are enormously wealthy.
I mean, when you think about it, you know, we have friends who, among those you're interviewing in the books, who just make some very big purchases lately that I think are, you know, even though they sound, you know, their one purchase may be more than my collection is worth.
You know, it's still far less proportionately, is my guess, you know.
than what I was spending.
I mean, I was basically spending everything I made on it and a lot that I didn't make on it.
I mean, I was just living on it.
You clearly crossed the line.
You weren't just getting material then to learn.
No, by that time, no.
I was already... Sure, I mean, there's no question.
I'm a serious, serious collector.
That's great.
There's no question about it.
And there's no... Now, looking back on it, even though, you know, I'm finally doing far, far better,
There are some things that now would have gone up so many times that I got up I could have bought them then.
You know, I traded and never sold.
It's very interesting in all those years.
But, I mean, I was often trading things and making.
I was considered, I think, in my field a bad trader because I traded from passion.
I didn't care if I was giving away something that was more valuable as long as it was something that I wanted.
And even though there was no clear goal in mind, I just became absolutely intrigued, you know, clearly passionate about these areas.
One thing that the people I'm writing about have in common, for the most part, is that they know their collections.
And then you get people who buy, I mean,
Not to mention names, but like Carter Burden in New York, he was acquired 80,000 books for seven or eight years, five or 6,000 authors.
I can't imagine that this man knows all his authors, never mind all of his books.
What's the purpose of that kind of a collection?
I mean, yours really is a very clear collection.
It really does nourish your profession.
You know everything that you... I assume that you read everything that you buy.
Well, there was a time when I honestly said I'd read every book that I owned.
I can no one would say that.
But you know every book that you wrote.
Well, I try.
And even when I buy for the library, I mean, there's a process where every book that I buy, whether it's cataloged by me or somebody else or one of the free people who work for me, it's still... It goes on a shelf for me to look at and feel and handle before it's shelved, you know, in the body of the collection.
Okay.
And that's essential.
But even there, it gets out of hand.
I mean, if you buy a collection of 500 books or 1,000 books, it's awfully hard to do that.
Of course, at this point, I know most of those books.
If we buy a collection of 500 books, they're probably not going to be more than a handful.
I don't know.
But I do find that necessary.
The other thing that's interesting about these books is that you often buy a book for a particular reason.
and then five years down the line you're writing about something else, and it never occurs to you that a book you already own has material in this other area, because that's not why you got it.
I mean, and that's another rationale for having the book rather than taking it out of a library and returning it.
I absolutely subscribe to that.
It happens.
I have books I've had for 10, 15 years, and all of a sudden, and it may not even be a book that you've ever read, but you know where that book is, and you know what's in it.
Winston Churchill said it's not important for a gentleman
who has read every book in his library.
It's important for him to know what's in his library and how it can help him.
And that's a pretty good working definition.
I would say I have no objection to that protocol.
I mean, I think we both know that the majority of people who collect books don't read them.
I mean, I think that that really is flat-out true.
And I think one of the reasons that booksellers were so good to me in the years when I had no money, and I formed these relationships with a lot of terrific booksellers, Steve Wiseman is a good example, was at the lecture yesterday.
You know him from Zoom next.
I don't know how many years, you could ask him about this, it was before I was able to buy a book from him.
I used to come to his shop and sit there and read books.
I mean, I would salivate over these books, and I just couldn't afford to buy them.
And he, I mean, he just used to let me go into the shop and sit there and read them, you know.
He didn't have the bug.
I mean, you're giving...
pieces of yourself here.
Sure.
You know, and there's some books that got away even from him in those years because he thought I really couldn't afford them.
I mean, you know, he would turn up some wonderful things.
Can you give me an example or two of things that you really, I mean, that are elusive, that you really, but maybe you don't want to tell me that.
Well, there's always the thing if they go in print, it makes it really hard, but one of the books I referred to yesterday is a good example of that.
I mean, it's my worst story as a book collector, even though it has a
as happy an ending as I could have, and that was that I was really intrigued with this French book, Jean Prévost, Le Premier Parti de Subtle and Pleasant Invention.
And I was able to locate a copy, and it had never been written about, really, more than a paragraph at the most in any magical literature that I knew of, even in France, and yet I knew that it was incredibly important, and I was able to get the book,
and I had to make payments to get it.
It was, you know, thousands of dollars, and at a time when I had... So somebody knows that.
Yeah, although, you know, yeah, sure.
I mean, well, it's a 16th century book.
That's the first book in its field.
So, you know, this is not going to be a hundred-dollar book.
On the other hand, we're not talking about hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars either.
But I actually, through a few disasters that seem just so incredibly peculiar, I mean...
a tour of Australia that fell apart because of an airplane strike, Johnny Carson's divorce.
I mean, things that seemed that they would have nothing to do with my life made it impossible for me to pay for this book during a requisite amount of time.
And so I was able to steer the book into the hands of a very good friend.
But it still was a real loss, even though there's no place on earth I would be happier to have this book than where it wound up.
I would still be happier to own it myself.
You don't.
No, I no longer do.
I owned it for six months, and I no longer do.
Did you ever try and... Well, the nature of the transaction with my friend was that
um we wouldn't do that you know and now that i could pay for the book you know i mean that option doesn't exist anymore and i wouldn't so you know um i shouldn't say i wouldn't if the opportunity was there but that that was part of the transaction and i mean his dealing was totally fair on it and the other thing is it's interestingly enough another friend would have loaned me the money to do it at that time but i was so in debt that i was very worried about it i mean i was already many thousands in debt to uh to booksellers and
I don't know.
I suppose there's some part of that that's sobering and also important.
Like I said before, we were talking about the negative side of collecting.
The idea of coveting things so much is not helping.
It's clearly not helping.
Well, it's a mania.
I mean, so they call it a mania.
Yeah, you're right.
It is.
Did I tell you the title of my book?
I'm not sure.
The title of my book is A Gentle Madness.
Oh, no, you haven't.
That's very nice.
I derive it from Isaiah Thomas, whose grandson wrote a little obituary for him, and he said, my grandfather was afflicted with the gentlest of infirmities, bibliomania.
And I said, that's nice.
So I say, a gentle madness, colon, excursions, excursions among book collectors, past and present.
But the beauty of it is, is how...
Your example is really wonderful because you as a professional person had a kinship with people two and three or four centuries in the past.
Oh, absolutely.
And book collectors also.
I mean, I will actually trace behavioral patterns and we're not going to make this a sociological study.
Well, but to some extent it has to be.
But motivation is one of the key things we're trying to establish.
Well, here's the thing that will probably strike you as really strange and contradictory.
And yet, to me, it's perfectly rationalized.
And that is...
that I've invented quite a few effects of my own in magic.
I invent material.
Tell me a couple.
Unimportant, really.
You'll see why I don't.
The thing is, there is a great repository of material of currently invented magic.
There are magic magazines that go out, and there are thousands of aficionados who buy these magazines and books that are published all the time.
of original creations by magicians.
And to an overwhelming extent, these creations are not original at all.
They're either people who haven't read the past literature and don't know, or they're people who are creating variations of published effects, and in doing so, not realizing that they're publishing the discarded methods of more brilliant inventors.
I mean, this happens to Vernon all the time.
He's the best example of that.
He published a trick, you know, I mean, he's published hundreds of thousands of really wonderful things with new concepts.
And for most of his life, he's then seen people publish the variations that he discarded to get to this brilliant method, you know, being put out by people who think they're brilliant and original and innovative and who don't have the understanding that what they're publishing is not nearly as good as what's already been published and don't have the wisdom to assume that someone else might have thought of it first.
Anyway, I've chosen in my life not to be involved in that.
I have never published an idea of mine in a magical journal, a trip of mine, an effect of mine.
And this would seem contradictory because I derive so much pleasure from written effects.
I give effects that I've done to magicians whose work I like.
They, in turn, may give me effects of theirs, published or unpublished.
That's not the point.
Because I'd like to see what I've come up with handled beautifully.
I'd like to see someone who will take the time and energy to do it well.
If I put it in a magazine, I'm basically giving my permission for it to be done and butchered by anybody.
And I just won't become part of that.
And I also won't become part of the petty game of who invented what and what came first.
And there is a genuinely vitriolic magic scene for people who hate each other.
I mean, literally despise each other, you know, claiming credit for things that for the most part go back far earlier than these people who were even alive and they don't even understand that.
And I just won't take part in this.
And people say to me, well, you know, how do you do that?
How can you have a position like that?
You know, wouldn't you be deprived if you didn't know this secret?
You know, you were fortunate as a kid, and you knew great magicians, and they told you things, or you had access to books.
You know, what if you didn't?
And I say, I would rather that these things remain secret, and even I didn't know about them, than that they became so public that they lost all respect.
And that seems like a genuine contradiction, but I think I can rationalize it.
The most interesting case in the history of magic about that.
Well, just before you pick that up on that, but...
you still feel it is important that this wonderful effect
should be passed on.
I mean, Richard Jay's only a temporary resident.
Yeah, no, no, I do.
You know, I'd like to think of that.
You know, and I mean, like I say, I don't... So how is that done?
Through the mentor process?
Well, I think so, that that is the answer, right, that it's done, you know, person-to-person rather than a general dissemination of knowledge.
Okay, now pick up where you were.
Well, where I was going to pick up was a man who I mentioned again in the talk yesterday, who is really significant.
There's a man named Johann Nephemok Hoppsons, or this Viennese official.
I couldn't write, I tried to write that one down.
Yeah, it's a wonderful, wonderful man.
You know, if you want, I'll let you look at the... I have a written text of the thought.
I mean, I went off and spoke much more about American imprints because we were at AAS, but if that's helpful for you to take a look at that, yeah, sure.
Anyway, Hopsinger is a great example because this is a man I admire as much as anyone in the world of magic, and he was, you know, remarkably innovative, and you might remember there was a question from the floor about that, about how long his theater was up in Vienna, and
What I didn't go into detail about is that he lived a very hard life.
He died impoverished.
His magic, which was accepted by the Viennese aristocracy, was never effective when he went on the road with it.
You know, he was a small and elegant performer.
There's no one in the history of magic I would have rather seen perform, because I don't have such a precise idea of how he actually worked.
I feel probably even more of a kinship with a man named Max Malini, who I have a long chapter about in my book, but I have a real sense of what Malini was like when he performed with Hobson.
You know, if I could go back in history, I'm much less sure of what it would have been.
I know his inventions were absolutely brilliant.
But this is a case where almost everything we know about Hobson came from this one man, this German named Otto Carfischer, because Hobson at the end was bitter and anguished and impoverished.
and he asked his wife to destroy all his notes and letters and all his material.
And through the efforts of this one man who tracked down firsthand the pupils of Hostinger, the few pupils he had over his years, he resurrected all this material.
Now, it is.
It's truly a great and romantic story.
So, I mean, to me, this is genuinely wonderful.
And yet today, I mean, I read accounts written by...
by supposed magic authorities who say that Hobson's work is boring and obsolete, and, you know, you want to strangle them, you know, because they're again failing to see the beauty of this idea.
Who was the person, do you know the name of the person who rescued Hobson's work?
Yeah, sure, and his name was Otto Carr Fisher.
O-T-T-A-K-A-R.
O-T-T-O-K-A-R.
F-I-S-C-H-E-R.
Well, he's much of a hero in the... Oh, yeah, I mean, he died years ago, and he is...
But is he a hero or not?
I mean, this has happened all through literature.
I mean, how many times have we heard about novelists asking for their crafts to be destroyed?
This is, to me, a great romantic story in magic, that this man, you know... And then when you read Hobson's letters, too, I mean, all the concerns and passions that I find myself expressing to friends who are my really great magical friends, like Percy or Steve Freeman, the people we're talking about, I see in Hobson's letters people who don't understand his creations.
He's writing to his friends...
who are complaining that these things that he's sending them are too expensive.
And they're absolutely brilliant ideas.
And if I think they're brilliant in 1990, what must have they been like in 1850?
I mean, it's staggering to think of the effect that these must have had on people.
And yet there's the same unfeeling, unseeing.
Yes, there are contemporary accounts.
There's some contemporary reviews of him, and there was a biography that was written of him in a journal that very few people know about.
And yeah, so it wasn't, you know, there was a record of him.
There's a street named after him in Vienna.
I mean, you know, people knew, you know.
So you've done your bit to perpetuate him.
Well, maybe, maybe.
I mean, how do you perpetuate him again?
I think
There are two ways.
One is to write about it.
You write about it.
The other thing is obviously to perform his effects, which I do, I think.
That's wonderful.
That's very difficult, too.
You see, in magic... See, we're winding up talking more about magic than books, but I suppose the only way to understand my sort of strange take on things is that it's very hard to give credit for magic.
You know, a songwriter can effortlessly credit the person who wrote his song, and that does nothing to take away from it.
a singer who can credit the songwriter, exactly.
But a magician who stops a performance to say, this was invented by someone else.
I mean, I can do that in an historical lecture.
It's one of the reasons I love that form.
If I'm sitting here and my job is to create some miracle, nothing will take away more from the miracle than to tell you it was invented by someone else.
Again, one of the reasons magic is different than any other performing art.
I mean, you want to come away sensing
that the person you saw was magical, you know, not that they bought a prop, practiced a thing, read a book, you know, so it's very, very hard to credit.
And yet I do want to perpetuate Hobson's Earp and other people who I think were geniuses, and that may be one of the reasons that at the moment I don't perform in nightclubs, and I do do lectures on the history of magic.
But I don't, I wasn't trying to suggest that you would credit the originator,
in the course of a performance, but you certainly do it when you write books and when you give your lectures, you're paying homage at that point.
Yeah, and I think it's good to do.
I mean, that whole performance yesterday was, I mean, that was a whole exercise in giving credit.
Yeah, I agree that it was, yeah, and like I said, I like it and I'm comfortable doing it, but I would also say that it's contradictory to creating the greatest impression as a performer of magic.
I mean, that's what you do.
As a performer of magic, you want people to believe that you do miracles and that
See, one of the things that's so difficult about the field is the attribution of power.
I mean, that's a very complex issue.
What do people think when they see someone doing magic?
See, if I'm showing you as a gambling expert, I'm showing you that I'm competent to shuffle the deck and deal out any hand that I want, that I can stack the cards, that I can deal from the bottom, that I can deal from the middle, then you must pay me the compliment of having skill.
That's what I've shown you, that I have skill.
If I'm doing something that involves, you know, a ball coming under a cup, you're not sure whether this involves, you know, my hand or a prop or, I mean, what is the attribution there?
I mean, it's very different.
It's very difficult.
And almost all the really sage writers on magic talk about the fact that to do magic at its best, there should be no manifest display of skill.
That it should just look like something happened.
Well, I have theories about it.
I think personally I thought that there are only one of two ways you can really impress an audience.
And one is to show them something so dazzling that they will then have to say this man can do anything that can be done with a deck of cards.
Or to do nothing and then let these miracles take place.
But when these miracles take place and you've done nothing,
It's just as easy to attribute it to something like, you know, you often hear people say, that's a trick.
And that becomes some sort of satisfying answer for them, even though it means nothing.
Or that's something you buy in a store.
They're put off balance by this sort of thing, and they don't know.
It's very difficult.
So it's tricky.
And then the third area that I suppose is really interesting is the idea of mind reading or extrasensory perception.
Anything where you seem to be able to read someone's thoughts,
Well, then it goes back to power again.
Do you have that power?
Or is it attractive?
Do you?
I saw that little thing yesterday.
It was pretty good.
It's interesting.
I mean, it's very complex, and it's very difficult.
Interestingly enough, this Nikolai Tolstoy, who's writing a three-volume biography of Merlin, the magician, and I asked him.
I couldn't read the thing because of the truth.
historical novels of Celtic history, you know.
But the premise is interesting.
I said, why are you doing this?
He said, to justify the purchase of 10,000 books of Celtic history and the next 10,000.
I mean, this is another guy.
I mean, he's been so obsessed with this subject.
He knows as much about Merlin.
You know, the documentation of Merlin is a hell of a lot stronger than it was for King Arthur because the magician was, I guess,
elevated to a level that even a monarch occasionally wouldn't achieve.
I mean, do you find sometimes that you're placed in the category of a brain surgeon or, you know, an airline pilot, people to whom we entrust our fates?
I think I've one or two times expressed, and I'm not sure in what medium, and I'm not necessarily in any interview, that the only thing that ever scares me about magic is not what I do, but occasionally what people are willing to attribute to me, that people...
are it seems to me all too easily willing to attribute power to me and a mystical thing beyond anything that i do and that that's sometimes very troubling it's very scary i mean i've had people run out of out of clubs screaming and clutching rosary beads and i mean the reactions are sometimes and i've had other reactions so i've had people taking punches at me and throwing shot glasses at me people are often angry when they're fooled
um even though as you can tell from what i did yesterday i mean i try to be very respectful with the people that i use even though i think there's a lot of humor particularly in all my nightclub years um you know i don't want the humor to come out of attacking the people who are nice enough to help me but even so um when people are fooled their reactions just run the gamut of emotions and and all of those things well i think if people are fooled
They don't want to be humiliated, and I think that's the fine line.
Well, but the point is, I mean, I know there are times when there's absolutely nothing I've done to humiliate them, and yet they feel in some way humiliated, inferior, ignorant, whatever.
I imagine you have to judge the people carefully, very carefully, before you invite them on the stage.
I mean, you have to do a pretty quick character study, I would guess.
Yeah, and you're not always right.
Now you mentioned gambling.
Do they allow you to gamble in casinos?
I have been asked not to gamble in some casinos, but in general I'm allowed to play.
I don't any longer.
At one point in my life I was interested in playing cards.
I mean, it's hard to do both.
I should crap myself.
There's no way you can, so far as I know, I mean, I wish you could do anything to craps, is there?
Ha!
Is there?
I mean, I'll turn the machine off for this.
Of course, of course.
Really?
I'll shut that off.
No.
I mean, I'm not going to go into... You mean casino craps?
You mean somebody with skill can do things just throwing them like that?
Really?
Yeah.
Sure, but I mean, the biggest problem, I mean, you don't usually have to worry about that.
The problems are usually people, you know, a dice mob coming in to take off the casino.
rather than today, I mean... Oh, no, no, it's not the individual.
They're trying to be the host.
Right.
But I'm just wondering if you could make a certain number come up as opposed to, you know, make a hard floor come up or a six or a nine.
Well, sure, I mean, you can control, you know, dice.
I mean, admittedly, on a casino table, that's tougher than it is.
It's tough because you've got to hit them.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But, yeah.
That's not relevant.
Interesting.
Um...
You mentioned... I guess the great example of the one that got away is the one you told me, and it really didn't get away because it's in friendly hands.
Yeah, well, I mean, there are other examples.
What's one of the great finds?
Have you ever come across something?
I'll tell you a good start.
One day I was... I had a little house in Venice, you know, by the beach in California.
It's a nice backyard right on the Venice Canal.
And one day...
one day uh i i heard someone call my name a very strange actor ricky and i looked out and my former karate instructor was in a rowboat on the venice canal well this is a pretty strange sight you don't often see boats on the venice canal i mean it's you know the sort of body of water that hasn't been active right i mean it's not you know um
Anyway, my karate instructor and one of his kids was in this rowboat, and on a canal perpendicular to my canal, a house that I could literally see from my house, was another man who used to study karate with the same man, and they invited me over to his house.
Somehow they were in this rowboat and going to his house.
And I went over to this fellow's house, and he said to me, are you still collecting toys?
And I was never a serious toy collector, but I used a lot of wind-up and mechanical toys in my act.
I had all sorts of crazy effects.
I mean, I had a learned pig, which would go around and find playing cards.
I'd have one selected, and the learned pig would find it.
It was even before the book came out.
I mean, it was just one area that I played with a lot.
And in the process, I had a couple of hundred old toys.
I mean, some, I suppose, were valuable.
But it was never, I never, again, I didn't collect them as a collector.
I collected them for something to do.
And he remembered from the times we had worked out together, somehow this came up, and he used to work for an antique dealer, for an auctioneer, actually, an antique auctioneer.
And we must have once talked about this.
And I said to him, no, I really only collect books and paper.
And he said, paper?
He wasn't even familiar with the term paper as, you know, posters, playbills.
And I said, yeah, magicians, posters, and playbills.
And he said, oh, I have a poster of a magician.
And he walked out, and he came back with perhaps the most common poster a man who didn't collect magic would have.
It was a magician named Alexander.
When I was a kid in New York, I used to be around the village for a dollar apiece, and now they're, of course, worth much more.
But a great poster of this magician, Claude Alexander Conlon, with a big question mark around his turban was fashioned into a question mark, and it said, Alexander at the top, the man who knows.
And the printer on these posters was of Yaga Bombay, which I'm sure was done to make it look exotic, because Conlon was from the Midwest.
He'd probably never been to India in his life.
The poster was probably printed in Hoboken.
I mean, all of this made it great fun.
But it was a startling image, you know, this classic profiled face with this turban into a question mark, the man who knows.
I said to him, oh, that's very nice.
And he said, are you interested in this?
I said, well, I have it.
You know, but it's terrific.
Thanks for showing it to me.
You know, what's up?
Is the science?
No, no.
So then he says, you know, we sit down, we have a beer, and he says, I've got a poster of comedians.
Do you want to see that?
Well, anybody who's like, you know better than to say no.
He hauls out a six-sheet poster.
Six-sheet.
Six-sheet poster.
An enormous poster.
And on the top it says, Comedians de Mephisto.
And the Comedians de Mephisto was a name for one of the most famous magic acts in the world.
It was a subtitle for the act of Leroy, Thoma, and Bosco.
So he has your attention now.
He has my attention.
I have never seen this poster in my life.
I have now started to salivate into my beer.
Sergei Leroy was a great Belgian illusionist who invented one of the most famous magic illusions in the world.
The illusion was called the Azra Levitation.
You've probably seen it because it's still done to this day.
A woman was put on a couch and covered with a sheet, and he would make passes, and she would, you know, levitate under the sheet and go up above his head to almost the full extent of his arms outstretched over his head, and then he would whip the cloth away, and there would be no one there.
Good trick.
I mean, great, great effect.
He was a brilliant inventor.
And he did this act with his wife, you know, Leroy Toma in Bosco.
His wife, Toma, was an English woman named Mary Ford, who was a wonderful coin manipulator.
And then Bosco initially was a fellow named Leo Bosco, Leon Bosco, who was a comedy entertainer.
And then another interesting man took over the job as Bosco.
This was a guy named Dr. James William Elliott, who was a Harvard medical man who gave up his medical practice to do magic.
Yeah, it was a wonderful story.
He used to rent, he's from Boston, and he rented two hotel rooms whenever he traveled.
And one, he would just have a chair and a table and a deck of cards in.
And he would go into this room all day long and practice, and he'd build himself as a fiction.
the champion, the challenge card champion in the world.
And he would elicit the responses of other people to meet him in some test of magical skills.
And when Vernon was a boy, you know, he had a wonderful session where he fooled Elliot and they became great friends.
And, you know, so again, it lives that way.
I mean, I have a certain sense that I know Elliot.
And we also have five manuscript notebooks of Dr. Elliot in the Mulholland Library.
So again, part of this whole link, some of it, which is attached to the books and manuscripts,
And some of it, which comes from people.
And I do techniques in my work that come from Eliot that I was taught from Vernon, and that's wonderful.
How did you connect with Vernon?
Oh, so you brought this poster by the way.
Well, no, I mean, the story's even better than that.
I'll go back to that.
So now, not only that, the story's printed by my, the poster's printed by my favorite printer, this great lithographer in Hamburg, Adolf Friedlander.
It's a staggering image with cauldrons and animals and devils and the three people, Leroy, Tomlin, and Bosco, and it's six years.
I've never seen this one.
It's about the size of that mirror, almost exactly the size of this whole three-part mirror.
And now I look at it... Probably looking at 20 feet by 12 feet, something like that.
I don't know if it was quite that long, but... I mean, you can see, you know, all three...
Well, you can figure it out pretty much.
A standard one sheet is 28 by 40, so you just, you know, picture three times that, you know.
So, I look at this thing and I say, boy.
And the condition of Jesus Christ.
Well, it's mounted on brown craft paper, which is, you know, certainly not the way you would conservatorially mount anything like that, but it was in surprisingly good condition.
You know, it's a piece right around the turn of the century.
And...
In those days, I had never even seen many Friedlander pieces of that size.
I mean, I was just taken aback.
Just a karate guy.
Right, a karate guy whose house I could see from mine.
So I call up two of the biggest poster collectors I know, my great friends of mine.
They've never even heard of this piece.
Anyway, this guy now says, do you like this?
And I say, yeah, I like this a lot.
And, you know, you're fed with this funny thing about how much do you have bought over it, and how much don't you, you know, what's going to happen here?
And the guy said, do you have a place big enough to hold it?
And I said, I know this is going to sound crazy, but I swear to you, my living room wall looks like it was made for this poster.
Okay, that's the first thing I said.
And he says, let's see.
And I say, what?
And we walk over, he puts the poster under his arm, and we walk over the canal.
And we walk to my house and we put it up at this wall and it looks like the wall is made for this puzzle.
And he says, well, you might as well have it.
And I say, well, this is terrific.
What do you want for it?
And he says, no, no, you might as well have it.
And he gives me this puzzle.
Just pretty wonderful.
And we wouldn't even speculate, right?
Well, there's no point.
There's no point.
But I mean, it's just...
It's one of those wonderful stories.
How did this poster of a Belgian magician printed in Germany wind up in a house five doors away from me on a canal in Venice?
That's the way he got it.
Yeah, and he didn't really... The story wasn't interesting enough for me to remember.
It came with some stuff.
And here's the other poster.
It's the most common.
And that's the first one he showed you.
That's the one you were going to like.
And I mean, you know, there's so many interesting.
How about manuscript material?
Do you collect manuscript material?
Because I would think that ultimately, if you're a serious collector, you have to go to manuscripts.
I mean, I think anybody who's serious, particularly anybody who's writing history, you know, wants to find their original source material.
One of the manuscripts I own that's fun is
I own the manuscript of the memoirs of Count Joseph Borlowski, the celebrated Polish dwarf.
That's a great story, too.
He was, you know, he spanned the 18th and early 19th centuries, and he was a Polish dwarf who was a favorite in the courts of Europe.
And I have this beautifully, you know, calligraphed, I mean, not in some cursive style, but, you know, a beautiful round hand.
of his memoirs, which were published in both French and English.
I mean, his famous memoir, first published in the 1790s.
But the story that's so great about Berlowski is that, you know, dwarfs traditionally didn't live very long, and apparently he took an annuity out on his life when he was around 80 or so, and completely bankrupted the people who took out his annuity because he lived to be well into his 90s, you know.
And so that's one of, you know, I'm sure I have other manuscripts as well.
That's one of the ones that just comes... Speaking for yourself now, a lot of the effects that you've created
Why are you not interested in publishing them and keeping them secret?
Do you record them?
Do you write them down?
I have to confess I'm pretty bad at it.
You don't?
I don't religiously do it at all.
And my memory is such that I've forgotten quite a few things.
So you really haven't documented this stuff?
I mean, certainly not the way you would think someone who's a curator and historian should.
No, the answer is no.
I haven't.
I've got to turn this before it runs out.
I'm going to turn it right now.